site/docs/src/installation.md, before:

# Installation

## Environment requirements

- OS: `Ubuntu 22.04` or `macOS 12`.
- `stack` is installable.
- `eo-phi-normalizer` is installable.

## Install `stack`

{{#include ./common/install-stack.md}}

## Install `eo-phi-normalizer`

Install the `eo-phi-normalizer` executable globally via [stack](https://docs.haskellstack.org/en/stable).
Then, the `eo-phi-normalizer` executable will be available on `PATH`.

### Install `eo-phi-normalizer` from the repository

{{#include ./common/enter-repository.md}}

{{#include ./common/install.md}}

### Install `eo-phi-normalizer` from Hackage

<!-- `$ printf "stack update\nexport LC_ALL=C.UTF-8\nstack install --resolver lts-$(cat stack.yaml | sed -nE 's/.*lts-(.*)/\1/p') eo-phi-normalizer-"$(normalizer --version)` as sh -->

```sh
stack update
export LC_ALL=C.UTF-8
stack install --resolver lts-22.16 eo-phi-normalizer-
```

## Update `eo-phi-normalizer`

Run `stack install ...` as in one of the methods above.

## Uninstall `eo-phi-normalizer`

Learn where `stack` installs programs.

```sh
stack path --programs
```

Learn how to uninstall a program.

```sh
stack uninstall
```

Commit message:

feat(site): mention Hackage package versions

site/docs/src/installation.md, after:

# Installation

## Environment requirements

- OS: `Ubuntu 22.04` or `macOS 12`.
- `stack` is installable.
- `eo-phi-normalizer` is installable.

## Install `stack`

{{#include ./common/install-stack.md}}

## Install `eo-phi-normalizer`

Install the `eo-phi-normalizer` executable globally via [stack](https://docs.haskellstack.org/en/stable).
Then, the `eo-phi-normalizer` executable will be available on `PATH`.

### Install `eo-phi-normalizer` from the repository

{{#include ./common/enter-repository.md}}

{{#include ./common/install.md}}

### Install `eo-phi-normalizer` from Hackage

You can see all package versions on its [Hackage page](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/eo-phi-normalizer).

Use the necessary version in the `stack install` command.

<!-- `$ printf "stack update\nexport LC_ALL=C.UTF-8\nstack install --resolver lts-$(cat stack.yaml | sed -nE 's/.*lts-(.*)/\1/p') eo-phi-normalizer-"$(normalizer --version)` as sh -->

```sh
stack update
export LC_ALL=C.UTF-8
stack install --resolver lts-22.16 eo-phi-normalizer-
```

## Update `eo-phi-normalizer`

Run `stack install ...` as in one of the methods above.

## Uninstall `eo-phi-normalizer`

Learn where `stack` installs programs.

```sh
stack path --programs
```

Learn how to uninstall a program.

```sh
stack uninstall
```
