site/docs/src/user-defined-rules.md, before:

# User-defined rules

You can define [rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Term_rewriting_systems) for the `PHI` language using `YAML` and the [MetaPHI](#metaphi) language that is a superset of `PHI`.

## `MetaPHI`

See the `MetaPHI` [Labelled BNF](https://bnfc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lbnf.html) in [Syntax.cf](https://github.com/objectionary/eo-phi-normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/grammar/EO/Phi/Syntax.cf).

## phi-paper rules

Currently, the `eo-phi-normalizer` supports rules defined in an unpublished paper by Yegor Bugayenko.

![Rules](media/rules.jpg)

## yegor.yaml

The rules are defined in [yegor.yaml](https://github.com/objectionary/eo-phi-normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml).

Each rule has the following structure:

- `name` - Rule name.
- `description` - Rule description.
- `context` - (optional) Rule context. A context may contain:
  - `global_object` - (optional) Global object `MetaId`.
  - `current_object` - (optional) Current object `MetaId`.
- `pattern` - Term pattern written in `MetaPHI`.
  - When this term pattern matches a subterm of a `PHI` term, `MetaId`s from the term pattern become associated with matching subexpressions of that subterm.
- `result` - Substitution result.
  - `MetaId`s in the subterm pattern get replaced by their associated subexpressions.
- `when` - A list of conditions for pattern matching.
  - `nf` - A list of `MetaId`s associated with subexpressions that should be in [normal form](#normal-form).
  - `present_attrs` - A list of attributes that must be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must contain these attributes.
  - `absent_attrs` - A list of attributes that must not be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must not contain these attributes.
- `tests` - A list of unit tests for this rule.
  - `name` - Test name.
  - `input` - An initial `PHI` term.
  - `output` - The initial `PHI` term after this rule was applied.
  - `matches` - Whether the term pattern should match any subterm.

### Normal form

An expression is in normal form when no rule can be applied to that expression.

Commit message:

fix(site): - add details about the pattern type - inline the section about NF

site/docs/src/user-defined-rules.md, after:

# User-defined rules

You can define [rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Term_rewriting_systems) for the `PHI` language using `YAML` and the [MetaPHI](#metaphi) language that is a superset of `PHI`.

## `MetaPHI`

See the `MetaPHI` [Labelled BNF](https://bnfc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lbnf.html) in [Syntax.cf](https://github.com/objectionary/eo-phi-normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/grammar/EO/Phi/Syntax.cf).

## phi-paper rules

Currently, the `eo-phi-normalizer` supports rules defined in an unpublished paper by Yegor Bugayenko.

![Rules](media/rules.jpg)

## yegor.yaml

The rules are defined in [yegor.yaml](https://github.com/objectionary/eo-phi-normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml).

Each rule has the following structure:

- `name` - Rule name.
- `description` - Rule description.
- `context` - (optional) Rule context. A context may contain:
  - `global_object` - (optional) Global object `MetaId`.
  - `current_object` - (optional) Current object `MetaId`.
- `pattern` - Term pattern written in `MetaPHI`.
  - The pattern must be an object (formation, application, dispatch, etc.)
  - When this term pattern matches a subterm of a `PHI` term, `MetaId`s from the term pattern become associated with matching subexpressions of that subterm.
- `result` - Substitution result.
  - `MetaId`s in the subterm pattern get replaced by their associated subexpressions.
- `when` - A list of conditions for pattern matching.
  - `nf` - A list of `MetaId`s associated with subexpressions that should be in the normal form.
    - An expression is in the normal form when no rule can be applied to that expression.
  - `present_attrs` - A list of attributes that must be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must contain these attributes.
  - `absent_attrs` - A list of attributes that must not be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must not contain these attributes.
- `tests` - A list of unit tests for this rule.
  - `name` - Test name.
  - `input` - An initial `PHI` term.
  - `output` - The initial `PHI` term after this rule was applied.
  - `matches` - Whether the term pattern should match any subterm.
