site/docs/src/commands/normalizer-transform.md, before:

# normalizer transform

## `MetaPHI`

You can define [rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Term_rewriting_systems) for the `PHI` language (the $\varphi$-calculus language) using `YAML` and the `MetaPHI` language that is a superset of `PHI`.

See the `MetaPHI` [Labelled BNF](https://bnfc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lbnf.html) in [Syntax.cf](https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/grammar/EO/Phi/Syntax.cf).

## phi-paper rules

Currently, the `PHI` normalizer supports rules defined in an unpublished paper by Yegor Bugayenko.

![Rules](media/rules.jpg)

### yegor.yaml

These rules translated to `MetaPHI` are in [yegor.yaml](https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml).

Each rule has the following structure:

- `name` - Rule name.
- `description` - Rule description.
- `context` - (optional) Rule context. A context may contain:
  - `global-object` - (optional) Global object `MetaId`.
  - `current-object` - (optional) Current object `MetaId`.
- `pattern` - Term pattern.
  - When this term pattern matches a subterm of a `PHI` term, `MetaId`s from the term pattern become associated with matching subexpressions of that subterm.
- `result` - Substitution result.
  - `MetaId`s in the subterm pattern get replaced by their associated subexpressions.
- `when` - A list of conditions for pattern matching.
  - `nf` - A list of `MetaId`s associated with subexpressions that shoud be in [normal form](#normal-form).
  - `present_attrs` - A list of attributes that must be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must contain these attributes.
  - `absent_attrs` - A list of attributes that must not be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must not contain these attributes.
- `tests` - A list of unit tests for this rule.
  - `name` - Test name.
  - `input` - An initial `PHI` term.
  - `output` - The initial `PHI` term after this rule was applied.
  - `matches` - Whether the term pattern should match any subterm.

### Normal form

An expression is in normal form when no rule can be applied to that expression.

## Environment

### Repository

The commands in the following sections access files that are available in the project repository.
Clone and enter the repository directory.

```sh
git clone https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer
cd normalizer
```

### Sample program

{{#include ../common/sample-program.md}}

## CLI

### `--help`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --help
```

```console
Usage: normalizer transform (-r|--rules FILE) [-c|--chain] [-j|--json]
                            [-o|--output-file FILE] [-s|--single] [FILE]

  Transform a PHI program.

Available options:
  -r,--rules FILE          FILE with user-defined rules. Must be specified.
  -c,--chain               Output transformation steps.
  -j,--json                Output JSON.
  -o,--output-file FILE    Output to FILE. When this option is not specified,
                           output to stdout.
  -s,--single              Output a single expression.
  FILE                     FILE to read input from. When no FILE is specified,
                           read from stdin.
  -h,--help                Show this help text
```

### `--rules`

Normalize a 𝜑-expression from `program.phi` using the [yegor.yaml](#yegoryaml) rules.

There can be multiple numbered results that correspond to multiple rule application sequences.

```$ as console
normalizer transform --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
Rule set based on Yegor's draft
Input:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
====================================================
Result 1 out of 1:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
```

### `--chain`

Use `--chain` to see numbered normalization steps for each normalization result.

```$ as console
normalizer transform --chain --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
Rule set based on Yegor's draft
Input:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
====================================================
Result 1 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 2 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 3 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 4 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 5 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 6 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
```

### `--json`

```$ as json
normalizer transform --json --chain --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```json
{
  "input": "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
  "output": [
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ]
  ]
}
```

### `--single`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --single --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
```

### `--single` `--json`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --single --json --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
"{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
```

### `FILE` not specified (read from stdin)

```$ as console
cat program.phi | normalizer transform --single --json --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml
```

```console
"{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
```

Commit message:

Add a CLI argument for maximum application depth

site/docs/src/commands/normalizer-transform.md, after:

# normalizer transform

## `MetaPHI`

You can define [rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Term_rewriting_systems) for the `PHI` language (the $\varphi$-calculus language) using `YAML` and the `MetaPHI` language that is a superset of `PHI`.

See the `MetaPHI` [Labelled BNF](https://bnfc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lbnf.html) in [Syntax.cf](https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/grammar/EO/Phi/Syntax.cf).

## phi-paper rules

Currently, the `PHI` normalizer supports rules defined in an unpublished paper by Yegor Bugayenko.

![Rules](media/rules.jpg)

### yegor.yaml

These rules translated to `MetaPHI` are in [yegor.yaml](https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer/blob/master/eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml).

Each rule has the following structure:

- `name` - Rule name.
- `description` - Rule description.
- `context` - (optional) Rule context. A context may contain:
  - `global-object` - (optional) Global object `MetaId`.
  - `current-object` - (optional) Current object `MetaId`.
- `pattern` - Term pattern.
  - When this term pattern matches a subterm of a `PHI` term, `MetaId`s from the term pattern become associated with matching subexpressions of that subterm.
- `result` - Substitution result.
  - `MetaId`s in the subterm pattern get replaced by their associated subexpressions.
- `when` - A list of conditions for pattern matching.
  - `nf` - A list of `MetaId`s associated with subexpressions that shoud be in [normal form](#normal-form).
  - `present_attrs` - A list of attributes that must be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must contain these attributes.
  - `absent_attrs` - A list of attributes that must not be present in subexpression bindings.
    - `attrs` - A list of attributes. Can include `MetaId`s.
    - `bindings` - A list of bindings that must not contain these attributes.
- `tests` - A list of unit tests for this rule.
  - `name` - Test name.
  - `input` - An initial `PHI` term.
  - `output` - The initial `PHI` term after this rule was applied.
  - `matches` - Whether the term pattern should match any subterm.

### Normal form

An expression is in normal form when no rule can be applied to that expression.

## Environment

### Repository

The commands in the following sections access files that are available in the project repository.
Clone and enter the repository directory.

```sh
git clone https://github.com/objectionary/normalizer
cd normalizer
```

### Sample program

{{#include ../common/sample-program.md}}

## CLI

### `--help`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --help
```

```console
Usage: normalizer transform (-r|--rules FILE) [-c|--chain] [-j|--json]
                            [-o|--output-file FILE] [-s|--single] [FILE]

  Transform a PHI program.

Available options:
  -r,--rules FILE          FILE with user-defined rules. Must be specified.
  -c,--chain               Output transformation steps.
  -j,--json                Output JSON.
  --max-depth ARG          Maximum depth of rules application. Defaults to 10.
  -o,--output-file FILE    Output to FILE. When this option is not specified,
                           output to stdout.
  -s,--single              Output a single expression.
  FILE                     FILE to read input from. When no FILE is specified,
                           read from stdin.
  -h,--help                Show this help text
```

### `--rules`

Normalize a 𝜑-expression from `program.phi` using the [yegor.yaml](#yegoryaml) rules.

There can be multiple numbered results that correspond to multiple rule application sequences.

```$ as console
normalizer transform --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
Rule set based on Yegor's draft
Input:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
====================================================
Result 1 out of 1:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
```

### `--chain`

Use `--chain` to see numbered normalization steps for each normalization result.

```$ as console
normalizer transform --chain --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
Rule set based on Yegor's draft
Input:
{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
====================================================
Result 1 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 2 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 3 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 4 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 5 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
Result 6 out of 6:
[ 1 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 2 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 3 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }
[ 4 / 4 ]{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
----------------------------------------------------
```

### `--json`

```$ as json
normalizer transform --json --chain --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```json
{
  "input": "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
  "output": [
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ],
    [
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ c ↦ ∅, d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, e ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d ⟧.e ⟧ }",
      "{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
    ]
  ]
}
```

### `--single`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --single --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }
```

### `--single` `--json`

```$ as console
normalizer transform --single --json --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml program.phi
```

```console
"{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
```

### `FILE` not specified (read from stdin)

```$ as console
cat program.phi | normalizer transform --single --json --rules ./eo-phi-normalizer/test/eo/phi/rules/yegor.yaml
```

```console
"{ ⟦ a ↦ ξ.b (c ↦ ⟦ ⟧).d (ρ ↦ ⟦ b ↦ ⟦ d ↦ ⟦ φ ↦ ξ.ρ.c, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧, c ↦ ∅, ν ↦ ⟦ Δ ⤍ 00- ⟧ ⟧ ⟧) ⟧ }"
```
